So it's time to take a look at our options screen! The question is, where do you
save player preferences like my master volume level
or levels that have been unlocked or any other preferences
that you may want to put in there, difficulty for example. Well
it turns out that Unity has something called PlayerPrefs. So
we're going to talk about what is PlayerPrefs, and why is it useful? Then, immediately
what are its limitations? Why are we providing our own wrapper class?
And then, we will actually make the wrapper class, and you're going to help us do
that. So firstly, let's look up PlayerPrefs in the
docs. Here it is! "Stores and accesses player preferences between
game sessions." Sounds pretty handy, and they have different places automatically
on different platforms. Now, it's not a use
for everything thing this. We need to use it carefully, but used carefully it's going to be very
simple. It does have some limitations, which we'll talk about in a minute,
but basically, you can set and get floats, ints, and strings
and they come in in pairs. So if we're going to
set an integer, then we give it a string like ("Player Score" and
10). So that's how you use it in its raw form, PlayerPrefs.SetInt
would give it a key, "Player Score" as a string, and then a value, and the
same happens with floats, apart from you passing a float,
and with strings, apart from you passing two strings. OK.
So it could be used for a small basic scoreboard, it could be used for a variety
of things, but note, we have some serious limitations.
It can be pretty slow to read and write, this is certainly not something we're doing every frame.
By slow I mean sub one second but still relatively slow.
There's only 1 megabyte file size, don't go crazy with this. It only supports
floats, ints, and strings, not bools, etc.
That's a sting, funny! Good artist though! And
don't abuse it, don't go absolutely crazy on it. What we're going to do is, we're going to put a
wrapper class around this. We're going to centralize all of the Player Preference reading and
writing. We're going to make that class static so it's available from anywhere
and this is going to allow for checking and error handling and it's going to
be much safer and clearer. My concern with just using
PlayerPrefs from anywhere is, say I've set a string, a float,
an int, or a
float, any of these types here, how do I know what the key I've set is?
I can ask has key, I'm not going to go through every possible string.
I can delete everything and lose information and start again, it's just a hassle!
What I want is, I want to know for sure what keys I'm using and what I've
stored, and by making a wrapper class, we're going to have all our keys nicely
laid out at the top of a single script, and then, whenever we want
to talk to PlayerPrefs we're going to do it through a nice set of methods. Things
like PlayerPrefsManager.SetMasterVolume
0.6f, that type of thing.
OK, so let's get on and make this happen.
Into Unity, make ourselves a script. Now, this is going to be a static class so we don't need to
attach the script to anything. I'm going to call it Player
PrefsManager why? Because if we were in another
script, any other script and I start typing PlayerPrefs,
you see we've got Unity's PlayerPrefs static methods here, and then
we've got ours down here, PlayerPrefsManager. It's right next to it, it reminds us
to use our own. Of course, you're going to have to let anybody else on your team or the other
half of yourself know that we always use the PlayerPrefsManager. So,
here is the PlayerPrefsManager, great. So, one of the first things
we're going to want to think about is, what are these keys we're going to use? Remember over
in the docs it says you need to give it things like "Player Score" or whatever. We
have to decide on a string and it has to be precisely the same, when we try and retrieve.
So why don't we start, by making ourselves some constants? Now, by the way,
constants are also static in C#, so
a constant string for the MASTER_
VOLUME. So, I'm going to use all capitals because this thing is a
constant. MASTER_VOLUME_KEY =
and then, what are we going to call it? Well, "master_volume", I'm going to use that format.
Fine! How about if we wanted a
key that we're going to use for, let's say
difficulty. Constant
string
DIFFICULTY_KEY. You get the idea! And then,
we're just going to call that "difficulty". Alright
fantastic! So, we're really centralizing all of this stuff. What else are we going to have? "master_volume"
"difficulty". What else would you like to do on here? We
may have level unlocks, for example, so this one's a little
complex. const string
Level, just going to call it LEVEL_KEY
and this would say "level
_unlocked_... Although we're not going to use it in this game, this is just going to be a general
PlayerPrefsManager that we can roll forward. "level_unlocked_ and I'm going to leave
a trailing underscore, because the sort of thing we would want to write
is this. We would want to say
"// level_unlocked_
1 for level 1, or 0 or 2 or 3. OK, so I'm leaving the underscore because
that's what's actually going to appear in the PlayerPrefs. So, all of our keys
are at the top. We know what we're storing in the PlayerPrefs, from the word go. Let's get rid of the existing methods.
Let's make our first
set method, which is going to be a public,
because other methods need to access it. It's static, there's only
one instance of this, it's going to run on the class.
void doesn't need to return anything, SetMaster
Volume. Pass in a (float
call it volume). OK,
now how would we talk to PlayerPrefs? Well, we would say PlayerPrefs
.Set what? Well SetFloat.
And we would use our (Master_Volume
_Key, and then the volume. OK, so that's very
thin at the moment, it's very simple, but already, it means that from
the outside, if I was in another method like this in a completely different class, I can go PlayerPrefs
Manager. and once we go past all the default methods
it's inherited, SetMasterVolume. And you can even show you that it takes a float
alright. So, we're starting to get a nicer interface to PlayerPrefs, much more
simple to use. Now, what we're going to want to do, in general it'd be even
nicer, if it helped us out if we were stupid. So, if the volume,
we're going to use a volume scale of 0 to 1. So, if the volume scale is
greater than 0 float and volume
is less than one float, then
go ahead and do what we said, otherwise
we want to throw an error and we're going to use Debug.Log
Error here. And what that's going to do is, over in
Unity, it's going to throw the Debug statement onto the Console
as a red stop sign like this, and it'll be one of these
ones you can filter for and that's just a much stronger type of error.
LogError something like ("Master
volume out of range")
OK, and it'll tell us the script that's called that.
So that's fine! So now, we have a little bit of a checking condition. You can go mad on these
checking conditions, but this is fine for now, for setting the Master Volume. How would it get
that Master Volume back? Well, I'll show you for this time, it'd be public! Static, they're all
going to be public static. What's it going to pass back? A float!
GetMasterVolume ()
and it's going to take in nothing, and it's going to be relatively
simple, this one. It's going to be PlayerPrefs.Get
Float, and now this is where the constant comes in,
we just pass in that key with confidence. Lovely! So, now what I like to
do is do a couple of spaces, and um
just to separate out from the future stuff. So, now should we just test this
quickly? Let's test this from one of the scenes. Which scene would be sensible?
GetMasterVolume, "not all code paths
return a value". Well, that's because we're not returning this value,
we just need to return PlayerPrefs.GetFloat.
Great! OK, I'm going to pop into the Start Scene for now,
because that's one that's not going to kind of disappear on us, and I'm going to
temporarily put a test object in here.
I'm just going to call it TEST, which we'll get rid of later. Add a simple script, I'll
reset its transform, add a script called a script test.
That's fine! Let's just go into the TEST script and just try this. On
Start () let's go PlayerPrefsManager.
SetMasterVolume (0.
3f); Yeah, in fact, and then before it, let's
go PlayerPrefsManager.GetMasterVolume and see what it does.
And then after, let's do the same thing again!
Now of course, this is going to do nothing because we're not
printing it. I'm going to use print, rather than Debug.Log here.
So, if we print all of these things, let's see what we get by default,
I suspect 0, and then, let's see what we get once we've set it to
(0.3f) into the PlayerPrefs. And then, let's see
what we get after we retrieve, once we've set our values. Let's just make
sure this getting and setting is working!